 19  Types of Scenarios 
Skirmish can be played as either an arena combat game, an interior adventuring game, or as a replacement for another modern or science-fiction roleplaying game ruleset. 

 19.1  Arena
When creating an arena, it can be sufficient to draw a playing field on hex paper. It's recommended that the area contain plenty of obstacles, and an environment conducive to being used in combat (anything from sand that can be kicked into an opponent's eyes to old, rusted, weapons (or pieces thereof) laying around, bones and body parts from previous combats, bloodstains, etc.) There can be additional restrictions placed on participates, for example: no missile weapons, no automatic or heavy weapons, no grenades, unarmed combat only.

Arena games are good for player vs. player type games, with or without a referee, or as a sideline to a bigger adventure or campaign. Arena games should include a basic goal or victory condition other than just killing off the other side, as well as a beginning setup (including where characters start, their basic weapons and armor, etc.). 

Combat continues until all on one side have fallen or escaped through the entrance hexes on the side of the board they started at. Unconscious figures cannot be slain. Each victor gets 100₢. Each loser gets 25₢ unless he ran away unhurt, in which case he would get nothing. 

Experience points can be awarded as follows: Each character gets 1 point for  participated in combat. ( Cowards get nothing ) 1 point for being on the winning side. 1 point for being the one to kill or subdue each foe. 1 point if you also took damage from a foe while in combat. For more examples see Section 15 Experience Points.

Wargame style scenarios can also be treated as arena games, especially with multiple players on a team and a GM. Experience points and other rewards may vary determine by the GM.

 19.2  Duel
Setup like arena combat, but continues until one side is dead, or ( if agreed upon ) unconscious or subdued. The victor(s) get all items their foes had and may keep these items or resell them at 75% of their original price. Surviving foes may only keep their wealth and items they did not carry into the arena. 

 19.3  Practice Combat
Players wear no armor and use practice, stun weapons, or only fight hand-to-hand instead of normal weapons. These can be supplied and returned if the character does not have his own. Practice weapons have the same characteristics as stun weapons, but do no damage. Hits are recorded electronically. One loses when becomes unconscious (with stun weapons) or accumulates a certain number of recorded hits (for practice weapons) Winners get credits of any amount agreed on by the players from the loser and each character gets 1 experience point. A characters can not usually be killed in practice combat and any wounds are quickly recovered.

 19.4  Interior adventures
Characters can use these rules to explore the interior of various locations such as a spaceships, space stations, buildings or caverns. They are usually drawn or mapped out on hex paper or square-ruled graph paper. Interior adventures usually have a GM, but self guided adventures are also possible.

 19.5  Replacement for another game
GMs and players can use adventures as is, converting opponents using the conversion rules at the end of the document. [conversion rules maybe]

 19.6  Handicap
If an experienced character is put against a novice character there are ways to balance the game. One way is to put some type of adverse condition that would be to the disadvantage of the experienced one, such as broken ground on his half of the board; giving the novice a foxhole to fire from, etc. Another giving the novice advanced weapons or armor.

The number of different combat situations are countless. Because of this players can invent their own scenarios. Some interesting ones are on a spaceship, maybe microgravity or vacuum but most certainly a small map board. Aliens can be used. Look in your favorite science fiction novel. Most only differ in attributes some have special abilities, such a free marksmanship skill. Mechanical robots can have STR and DEX attributes but there "intelligence" is different and would not have a INT in a human's sense, but they do have program restrictions, made by the players such as it cannot kill or it cannot use the dodge option, etc.