 2  1982 Preface
This game is a fast paced, action packed combat module compatible with Metagaming's highly successful The Fantasy Trip. In the place of swords and sorcery are lasers, rifles, and deadly weapons of technology.

Two or more players create characters and send them against each other. The characters' combination of strength, dexterity, and intelligence and the skill of the player will determine which player wins or loses. Winning characters will increase in skill, losers are buried.

This module can also be combined with Melee, Wizard, or any other parts of The Fantasy Trip. Try pitting your best swordsman against a star warrior with graphite armor and a laser pistol. Let some ulterior characters get lost in
a barbaric past.

Be creative! We allow you the limits of your imagination!

Good Gaming,

West Richmond Wargame Group

 3  2014 Preface

What you have before you is a project started by some teenagers in the early 80s. We had grown up playing games of all sorts including several early role-playing games but found the rules confusing or not well written. We found Metagaming's Melee and later The Fantasy Trip to have more logical rules and was fun to play. Along with a few friends we played it a lot. But what we really wanted to play was a science fiction RPG and we found it easy to modify the rules to a science fiction setting and during 1980 and 81 we did just that. We wrote these documents to share with others and hoped Metagaming would buy it but they were not interested. They did publish the article we wrote under the title Unofficial TFT Variant: Martian Vanguard MRAV in their magazine, Interplay. What we didn't know at the time was that Metagaming was falling apart and they were soon out of business. This game then sat on the shelf until recently. Inspired by others who have created new versions of role-playing games released in the 80s, I digitized our typewritten rules and re-wrote them to be based off of Chris Goodwin's Warrior and Wizard, an open licensed RPG.

I hope you enjoy our little game.

Carlisle

We would like to thank our playtesters: 

1982 Playtesters: David Butler, Kirk Collingwood, Barbara Henry, Carl Mueller, Todd Sites, Michael Vunk, and Matthew Rhode.

2014 Playtesters: Aaron Jolley

Special Thanks to Winchell Chung's Atomic Rockets site: http://www.projectrho.com/public_html/rocket/