 4  Introduction 
SKIRMISH is a game of close quarters combat using modern or speculative weapons. SKIRMISH could be described as between a war game and a roleplaying game. Each player has a playing piece that represents a character on a playing map while simulating a battle. Role playing elements are not required, but can make playing more fun and these rules can be use to handle the combat elements of a role playing game.

The game is suitable for two or more players, and can be played in three modes: player vs. player, player vs. player with a referee (here called a gamemaster or GM) or multiple players cooperating plus a GM. In player vs. player, each player creates a character and fights it out; in a player vs. player with GM situation, the gamemaster controls the environment as well as any additional characters not run by the players (known as non-player characters or NPCs); these NPCs can include other humans, aliens, or monsters, if present. If playing cooperatively with multiple players and a GM, one or more players create a character, and one person acts as the gamemaster and creates adventures and NPCs, makes decisions based on tough calls where there might be a question about the interactions between character abilities and the rules, and the like. 
 4.1  Dice
SKIRMISH only uses six-sided dice. You'll need at least three of them, perhaps as many as six or seven, but probably no more than that. These dice will be referred to in the text as "d6" for six-sided die. Two dice will be referred to as 2d6, three dice as 3d6, and so on. Adjustments to the dice roll, also called die modifiers, are referred to as follows: 2d6+1 means to roll two six-sided dice and add one to the total, while 3d6-2 means to roll three dice and subtract two. Other roleplaying games use dice with differing numbers of sides, and refer to those dice similarly. We use the notation here out of habit and clarity, even though d6 are the only die type we use in this game.
 4.2  Movement and Distance 
Combat and movement take place on a hexagonal grid. Two types of distance are referred to in SKIRMISH: hexes and multihexes. A hex is simply one space on the map; a multihex refers to one hex plus the six hexes immediately surrounding and touching it. One hex is approximately one and 1/3 meters (or about four feet) across. One multihex is approximately 4 meters (or 13 feet) across; one combat turn is approximately five seconds. 
 4.3  Characters 
The unit for play in this game is a character. He is created by the player and users the combination of attributes, skills, wealth, items, and player strategy to explore and survive. Attributes are defined as quantitative properties used to define a character within the game setting. Skills are learned competencies which gives their possessor some ability or advantage not given to others that do not have it. Characters also have qualitative properties such a personality, motivation, etc which are determined by the player.
